============================================
Equations of Motion with the Lagrange Method
============================================

.. note::

   You can download this example as a Python script:
   :jupyter-download-script:`lagrange` or Jupyter Notebook:
   :jupyter-download-notebook:`lagrange`.

.. jupyter-execute::

   import sympy as sm
   import sympy.physics.mechanics as me
   me.init_vprinting(use_latex='mathjax')

.. container:: invisible

   .. jupyter-execute::

      class ReferenceFrame(me.ReferenceFrame):

          def __init__(self, *args, **kwargs):

              kwargs.pop('latexs', None)

              lab = args[0].lower()
              tex = r'\hat{{{}}}_{}'

              super(ReferenceFrame, self).__init__(*args,
                                                   latexs=(tex.format(lab, 'x'),
                                                           tex.format(lab, 'y'),
                                                           tex.format(lab, 'z')),
                                                   **kwargs)
      me.ReferenceFrame = ReferenceFrame

Learning Objectives
===================

After completing this chapter readers will be able to:

- Derive the Lagrangian for a system of interconnected particles and rigid bodies
- Use the Euler-Lagrange equation to derive equations of motions given a Lagrangian
- Use the method of Lagrange multipliers to add constraints to the equations of motions
- Determine the generalized momenta of a system

Introduction
============

This book has already discussed two methods to derive the equations of motion
of multibody systems: Newton-Euler and Kane's method. This chapter will add a
third: the `Lagrange method`_, originally developed by `Joseph-Louis
Lagrange`_. These materials focus on Engineering applications for multibody
systems, and therefore build the Lagrange method around the terms found earlier
in Kane's equations. In other textbooks, the Lagrange method is often derived
from the `Variational principles`_, such as virtual work or the principle of
least action. A good starting point for studying the physical and mathematical
background of the Lagrange approach is [Lanczos1986]_.

.. _Joseph-Louis Lagrange: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph-Louis_Lagrange
.. _Variational principles: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variational_principle
.. _`Lagrange method`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagrangian_mechanics

Inertial Forces from Kinetic Energy
===================================

In Kane's method the negated generalized inertial forces equal the applied
forces, see :ref:`Unconstrained Equations of Motion`.  A large part of Kane's
method of deriving the equations of motions for a system is involved with
finding the generalized inertial forces. As an alternative, the following
equation also calculates the generalized inertial forces of a system, now by
starting from the kinetic energy :math:`K (\dot{\bar{q}}, \bar{q})` expressed
as function of the generalized coordinates :math:`\bar{q}`, and their time
derivatives. See :ref:`Energy and Power` for the definition of kinetic energy.

.. math::
  :label: eq-lagrange-inertial

   -\bar{F}^*_r = \frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\left(\frac{\partial K}{\partial \dot{q}_r}
        \right) - \frac{\partial K}{\partial q_r}

.. warning:: Note the two minus signs in the above equation

.. note::

   In Kane's method, it is possible to choose generalized speeds :math:`\bar{u}` that differ from
   the time derivatives of the generalized coordinates :math:`\dot{\bar{q}}`. By convention
   :math:`\bar{u} = \dot{\bar{q}}` is assumed when using the Lagrange method. Therefore, throughout
   this chapter :math:`\dot{\bar{q}}` is used.

The generalized inertial forces computed in this manner are the same as when
following Kane's method or the TMT method, used in the next chapter. This can
be shown by carefully matching terms in these formulations, as is done for a
system of point-masses in [Vallery2020]_.

Example: Torque Free Rigid Body
-------------------------------

This example is largely the same as the example in :ref:`Body Fixed
Newton-Euler Equations`. A key difference is a difference between the
generalized speeds describing the rotation. In the calculation with Kane's
method, they were body-fixed angular velocities, whereas here they are the
rates of change of the Euler angles.

First, set up the generalized coordinates, reference frames, and mass
properties for a single rigid body located by coordinates :math:`x,y,z` from
point :math:`O` and oriented by Euler angles :math:`\psi,\theta,\phi` relative
to the inertial reference frame :math:`N`:

.. jupyter-execute::

   t = me.dynamicsymbols._t
   m, Ixx, Iyy, Izz = sm.symbols('m, I_{xx}, I_{yy}, I_{zz}')
   psi, theta, phi, x, y, z = me.dynamicsymbols('psi, theta, phi, x, y, z')

   q = sm.Matrix([psi, theta, phi, x, y, z])
   qd = q.diff(t)
   qdd = qd.diff(t)

   q, qd, qdd

.. jupyter-execute::

   N = me.ReferenceFrame('N')
   B = me.ReferenceFrame('B')
   B.orient_body_fixed(N, (psi, theta, phi), 'zxy')

   I_B = me.inertia(B, Ixx, Iyy, Izz)

Then compute the kinetic energy:

.. jupyter-execute::

   N_w_B = B.ang_vel_in(N)
   r_O_Bo = x*N.x + y*N.y + z*N.z
   N_v_C = r_O_Bo.dt(N)
   K = m*N_v_C.dot(N_v_C)/2 + N_w_B.dot(I_B.dot(N_w_B))/2
   K

Use the kinetic energy to find the generalized inertial forces. Here we, as an
example, start with the generalized coordinate :math:`\psi`:

.. jupyter-execute::

   F_psi_s = K.diff(psi.diff(t)).diff(t) - K.diff(psi)
   F_psi_s

A similar derivation should be made for all generalized coordinates. We could
write a loop, but there there is a method to derive all the equations in one
go.  The vector of partial derivatives of a function, that is the gradient, can
be created using the
:external:py:meth:`~sympy.matrices.matrices.MatrixCalculus.jacobian` method.
The generalized inertial forces can then be found like this:

.. jupyter-execute::

   K_as_matrix = sm.Matrix([K])
   Fs = (K_as_matrix.jacobian(qd).diff(t) - K_as_matrix.jacobian(q)).transpose()
   Fs

While these are correct generalized inertia forces, the terms, particularly the
terms involving :math:`\ddot{q}_r` are mangled. It is common to extract the
system mass matrix :math:`\mathbf{M}_d` and velocity related force vector
:math:`\bar{g}_d` like before:

.. jupyter-execute::

   Md = Fs.jacobian(qdd)
   sm.trigsimp(Md)

.. jupyter-execute::

   qdd_zerod = {qddr: 0 for qddr in qdd}
   gd = Fs.xreplace(qdd_zerod)
   sm.trigsimp(gd)

Conservative Forces
===================

Recall from :ref:`Energy and Power` that `conservative forces`_, can be
expressed using the gradient of a scalar function of the generalized
coordinates, known as the `potential energy`_ :math:`V(\bar{q})`, thus the
conservative generalized active forces can be written as:

.. math::
   :label: eq-potential-energy

   \bar{F}_r^\textrm{c} = -\frac{\partial V}{\partial q_r}

.. warning:: Note the minus sign in the above equation.

.. _`conservative forces`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative_force
.. _`potential energy`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Potential_energy

Some examples of conservative forces are:

- a uniform gravitational field, for example on the surface of the earth, with
  potential :math:`V = m g h(\bar{q})`,
- gravity from Newton's universal gravitation, with potential :math:`V = -G
  \frac{m_1m_2}{r(\bar{q})}`,
- a linear spring, with potential :math:`V = \frac{1}{2}k(l(\bar{q}) - l_0)^2`.

For conservative forces, it is often convenient to derive the applied forces
via the potential energy.

The Lagrange Method
===================

Both the equation for computing the inertial forces from the kinetic energy and
the equation for computing the applied conservative forces from a potential
energy have a term in them with the partial derivative with respect to the
generalized coordinate.  Furthermore, the potential energy does not depend on
the generalized speeds.  Therefore, the resulting (inertial and conservative
applied) forces can be derived in one go, by combining the two equations.

Step 1. Compute the so called `Lagrangian`_ :math:`L`, the difference between
the kinetic energy and potential energy:

.. math::
   :label: eq-lagrangian

   L = K - V

.. _`Lagrangian`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagrangian

Step 2. Use the Euler-Lagrange equations (the name for the equation
:math:numref:`eq-lagrange-inertial`) to find the equations of motion:

.. math::
   :label: eq-euler-lagrange

   \frac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}t}\left(\frac{\partial L}{\partial \dot{q}_r}
   \right) - \frac{\partial L}{\partial q_r} = F_r^\textrm{nc}
   \textrm{ for } r = 1,\ldots,n

while being careful to include conservative applied forces in the potential
energy :math:`V` term, but not in the non-conservative generalized active force
:math:`F_r^\textrm{nc}`.

Example: Unconstrained System
-----------------------------

This example will use the Lagrange method to derive the equations of motion for
the system introduced in :ref:`Example of Kane's Equations`. The description of
the system is shown again in :numref:`fig-eom-double-rod-pendulum-repeat`.

.. _fig-eom-double-rod-pendulum-repeat:
.. figure:: figures/eom-double-rod-pendulum.svg
   :align: center
   :width: 600px

   Three dimensional pendulum made up of two pinned rods and a sliding mass on
   rod :math:`B`. Each degree of freedom is resisted by a linear spring. When
   the generalized coordinates are all zero, the two rods are perpendicular to
   each other.

The first step is to define the relevant variables, constants and frames. This step
is the same as for Kane's method.

.. admonition:: Frames and Bodies Setup
   :class: dropdown

    .. jupyter-execute::

       m, g, kt, kl, l = sm.symbols('m, g, k_t, k_l, l')
       q1, q2, q3 = me.dynamicsymbols('q1, q2, q3')
       t = me.dynamicsymbols._t

       q = sm.Matrix([q1, q2, q3])
       qd = q.diff(t)
       qdd = qd.diff(t)

       N = me.ReferenceFrame('N')
       A = me.ReferenceFrame('A')
       B = me.ReferenceFrame('B')

       A.orient_axis(N, q1, N.z)
       B.orient_axis(A, q2, A.x)

       O = me.Point('O')
       Ao = me.Point('A_O')
       Bo = me.Point('B_O')
       Q = me.Point('Q')

       Ao.set_pos(O, l/2*A.x)
       Bo.set_pos(O, l*A.x)
       Q.set_pos(Bo, q3*B.y)

       O.set_vel(N, 0)

       I = m*l**2/12
       I_A_Ao = I*me.outer(A.y, A.y) + I*me.outer(A.z, A.z)
       I_B_Bo = I*me.outer(B.x, B.x) + I*me.outer(B.z, B.z)

Start by defining the kinetic energy for each rigid body and particle:

.. jupyter-execute::

   KA = m*Ao.vel(N).dot(Ao.vel(N))/2 + A.ang_vel_in(N).dot(I_A_Ao.dot(A.ang_vel_in(N)))/2
   KA

.. jupyter-execute::

   KB = m*Bo.vel(N).dot(Bo.vel(N))/2 + B.ang_vel_in(N).dot(I_B_Bo.dot(B.ang_vel_in(N)))/2
   KB

.. jupyter-execute::

   KQ = m/4*Q.vel(N).dot(Q.vel(N))/2
   KQ

.. jupyter-execute::

   K = KA + KB + KQ

Form the potential energy from the conservative gravitational and spring forces:

.. jupyter-execute::

   V_grav = m*g*(Ao.pos_from(O) + Bo.pos_from(O)).dot(-N.x) + m/4*g*Q.pos_from(O).dot(-N.x)
   V_grav

.. jupyter-execute::

   V_springs = kt/2*q1**2 + kt/2*q2**2 + kl/2*q3**2
   V_springs

.. jupyter-execute::

   V = V_grav + V_springs

The Lagrangian is then:

.. jupyter-execute::

   L = sm.Matrix([K - V])
   sm.trigsimp(L)

Finally, derive the equations of motion:

.. jupyter-execute::

   fd = -(L.jacobian(qd).diff(t) - L.jacobian(q)).transpose()
   qdd_zerod = {qddr: 0 for qddr in qdd}
   Md = fd.jacobian(qdd)
   gd = sm.trigsimp(fd.xreplace(qdd_zerod))
   me.find_dynamicsymbols(Md), me.find_dynamicsymbols(gd)

.. jupyter-execute::

   Md

.. jupyter-execute::

   gd

The mass matrix :math:`\mathbf{M}_d` only depends on :math:`\bar{q}`, and
:math:`\bar{g}_d` depends on :math:`\dot{\bar{q}}` and :math:`\bar{q}`, just as
in Kane's method. Note that :math:`\bar{g}_d` now combines the effects of the
velocity related force vector and the conservative forces. In this setting,
:math:`\bar{g}_d` is often called the dynamic bias.

Generalized Momenta
===================

It is often useful to use a vector of intermediate variables when finding the
Euler-Lagrange equations. The variables are defined as:

.. math::

    p_r = \frac{\partial L}{\partial \dot{q_r}}

The variables are collected in a vector :math:`\bar{p}`. They are called the
generalized momenta, as they coincide with linear momentum in the case of a
Lagrangian describing a particle. Similar to the situation in the dynamics of
particles, there can be conservation of generalized momentum. This is the case
for the generalized momentum associated with ignorable coordinates, as defined
in :ref:`Equations of Motion with Nonholonomic Constraints`.

For the example pendulum, the generalized momenta are calculated as:

.. jupyter-execute::

    p = L.jacobian(qd).transpose()
    sm.trigsimp(p)

Constrained Equations of Motion
===============================

When using Kane's method, constraints are handled by dividing the generalized
speeds into two sets: the dependent and independent generalized speeds.
Depending on the type of constraints, the dependent generalized speeds are
eliminated by solving the constraint equation (for nonholonomic constraints)
or the time derivative of the constraint equation (holonomic constraints).
Kane's method only gives rise to :math:`p = n - m` dynamical equations, one for
each independent generalized speed. The Lagrange method gives rise to :math:`N`
dynamical equations, one for each coordinate plus `M + m` additional equations
to manage the constraints.

The constraints are handled using a generalized version of the approach in
:ref:`Exposing Noncontributing Forces`. First the constraints are omitted, then
a constraint force is added, with a known direction, but unknown magnitude.
Finally, the (second) time derivative of the constraint equation is then
appended to the equations found with the Euler-Lagrange equation.

For example, consider a particle of mass :math:`m` with position
:math:`\bar{r}^{P/O} = q_1 \hat{n}_x + q_2 \hat{n}_y + q_3\hat{n}_z` on a slope
:math:`q_1 = q_2` with gravity pulling the mass down the slope. The
unconstrained Lagrangian is :math:`L = \frac{1}{2}m(\dot{q}_1^2 + \dot{q}_2^2 +
\dot{q}_3^2) - mgq_3`.  The constraint force is perpendicular to the slope, so
is described as :math:`\bar{F} = F\hat{n}_x - F\hat{n}_y`. The appended
equation is the second time derivative of the constraint equation
:math:`\ddot{q_1} - \ddot{q_2} = 0`.  Combining all, gives:

.. math::

   \begin{array}{r}
     m\ddot{q}_1= \phantom{-}F\\
     m\ddot{q}_2= -F\\
     m\ddot{q}_3 + mg = \phantom{-}0\\
     \ddot{q}_1 - \ddot{q}_2\!\! = \phantom{-}0
   \end{array}

This can be put in matrix-form, by extracting the unknown acceleration and
force magnitude:

.. math::

   \begin{bmatrix}
     m & 0 & 0 &-1 \\
     0 & m & 0 & 1 \\
     0 & 0 & m & 0 \\
     1 & -1 & 0 & 0
   \end{bmatrix}
   \begin{bmatrix}
     \ddot{q}_1 \\
     \ddot{q}_2 \\
     \ddot{q}_3 \\
     F
   \end{bmatrix} =
   \begin{bmatrix}
     0 \\
     0 \\ -mg \\ 0
   \end{bmatrix}

It can be challenging to find the direction of the constraint force from the
geometry of the system directly.  There is a trick, called the method of the
`Lagrange multipliers`_, to quickly find the correct generalized forces
associated with the constraint forces.

.. _`Lagrange multipliers`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lagrange_multiplier

Given a motion constraint (time derivatives of configuration constraint or a
nonholonomic constraint) in the general form

.. todo:: Use same notation as my constraint chapters.

.. math::

    \sum_r a_r(\bar{q}) \dot{q}_r = 0

The generalized constraint force is found as:

.. todo:: Reconsider using Fr here, maybe Cr would make it distinct from
   generalized active forces.

.. math::

    F_r = \lambda a_r(\bar{q})

Here :math:`\lambda` is a variable encoding the magnitude of the constraint
force. It is called  the Lagrange multiplier. The same :math:`\lambda` is used
for each :math:`r`, that is, each constraint has a single associated Lagrange
multiplier.

Due to how it is constructed, the power produced by the constraint force is
always zero, as expected.

.. math::

    P = \sum_r F_r\dot{q}_r = \sum \lambda a_r(\bar{q})\dot{q}_r =
    \lambda \sum a_r(\bar{q})\dot{q}_r = \lambda \cdot 0

For example, consider the point mass to be constrained to move in a bowl
:math:`q_1^2 + q_2^2 + q_3^2 -1 = 0`, :numref:`fig-lagrange-bowl`.  Taking the
time derivative gives: :math:`a_1 = 2q_1`, :math:`a_2 = 2q_2`, and :math:`a_3 =
2q_3`.  This results in generalized reaction forces :math:`F_1 = 2\lambda q_1`,
:math:`F_2 = 2\lambda q_2` and :math:`F_3 = 2\lambda q_3`.

.. _fig-lagrange-bowl:
.. figure:: figures/lagrange-bowl.svg
   :align: center

   Point mass :math:`P` constrained to the surface of a spherical bowl with
   radius :math:`1` and constraint force measure numbers :math:`F_1,F_2,F_3`.

Often, there are multiple constraints on the same system. For convenience, the
handling of these constraints can be combined.  Consider the :math:`m+M`
dimensional general constraint equations consisting of the time derivatives of
the holonomic constraints and/or the nonholonomic constraints:

.. math::

    \bar{f}_{hn}(\dot{\bar{q}}, \bar{q}) =
    \mathbf{M}_{hn}\dot{\bar{q}} + \bar{g}_{hn} = 0 \in \mathbb{R}^{M+m}

the combined constraint forces are given as:

.. math::

    \bar{F}_r = \mathbf{M}_{hn}^\text{T}\bar{\lambda},

where :math:`\bar{\lambda}` is a vector of :math:`m + M` Lagrange multipliers,
one for each constraint (row in :math:`\mathbf{M}_{hn}`).

Example: Turn the Torque Free Rigid Body into a Rolling Sphere
--------------------------------------------------------------

The non-slip condition of the rolling sphere is split into three constraints:
the velocity of the contact point (:math:`G`) is zero in the :math:`\hat{n}_x`,
the :math:`\hat{n}_y`, and  the :math:`\hat{n}_z` directions. The first two
constraints are nonholonomic, the last constraint is the time derivative of a
holonomic constraint. All three constraints are enforced by contact forces in
their respective directions.

The contact point can be found according by :math:`\bar{r}^{G/B_o} = -r
\hat{n}_z`. By using the :ref:`Velocity Two Point Theorem`, the following
constraints are found.

.. math::

   \begin{array}{l}
     \bar{n}_x\cdot ({}^N\bar{v}^{B_o} + {}^N\bar{\omega}^B \times (-r\hat{n}_z)) = 0 \\
     \bar{n}_y\cdot ({}^N\bar{v}^{B_o} + {}^N\bar{\omega}^B \times (-r\hat{n}_z)) = 0 \\
     \bar{n}_z\cdot ({}^N\bar{v}^{B_o} + {}^N\bar{\omega}^B \times (-r\hat{n}_z)) = 0 \\
   \end{array}

These can be used to derive the constraint force and the additional equations
using the Lagrange-multiplier method as shown below. Note that here only the
first time derivative of the constraint equation is used, again because the
second time derivatives of the generalized coordinates appear.

.. admonition:: Frames and Body Setup
   :class: dropdown

   Setting up reference frames

   .. jupyter-execute::

      psi,theta, phi, x, y, z = me.dynamicsymbols('psi theta phi x y z')
      N = me.ReferenceFrame('N')
      B = me.ReferenceFrame('B')
      B.orient_body_fixed(N, (psi, theta, phi), 'zxy')

      # Mass and inertia
      m, Ixx, Iyy, Izz = sm.symbols('M, I_{xx}, I_{yy}, I_{zz}')
      I_B = me.inertia(B, Ixx, Iyy, Izz)

   Finding the kinetic energy:

   .. jupyter-execute::

      omega_B = B.ang_vel_in(N)
      r_com = x*N.x + y*N.y + z*N.z
      v_com = r_com.dt(N)
      K = omega_B.dot(I_B.dot(omega_B))/2 + m*v_com.dot(v_com)/2

   Deriving equations of motion:

   .. jupyter-execute::

      t = me.dynamicsymbols._t
      q = sm.Matrix([psi, theta, phi, x, y, z])
      qd = q.diff(t)
      qdd = qd.diff(t)

      L = sm.Matrix([K])
      fd = L.jacobian(qd).diff(t) - L.jacobian(q)

      qdd_zerod = {qddr: 0 for qddr in qdd}
      Md = fd.jacobian(qdd)
      gd = fd.xreplace(qdd_zerod)

To make this free floating body a rolling wheel, three constraints are needed: the
velocity of the contact point should be zero in :math:`\hat{n}_x`, :math:`\hat{n}_y`
and :math:`\hat{n}_x` direction.

.. jupyter-execute::

   r = sm.symbols('r')
   lambda1, lambda2, lambda3 = me.dynamicsymbols('lambda1, lambda2, lambda3')

   constraint = (v_com + B.ang_vel_in(N).cross(-r*N.z)).to_matrix(N)
   sm.trigsimp(constraint)

The Jacobian of the constraints with respect to :math:`\dot{\bar{q}}` is then:

.. jupyter-execute::

   Mhn = constraint.jacobian(qd)
   sm.trigsimp(Mhn)

This constraint information must then be added to the original equations. To do
so, we make use of a useful fact:

.. jupyter-execute::

   diff_constraint = constraint.diff(t)
   diff_constraint.jacobian(qdd) - Mhn

This equality is true for all constraints, as can easily be shown by taking the
time derivative of the constraint equation, using the product rule.

The combined equations can now be written in a block matrix form:

.. math::

   \begin{bmatrix}
     \mathbf{M}_d & \mathbf{M}_{hn}^T \\
     \mathbf{ M}_{hn} & 0
   \end{bmatrix}
   \begin{bmatrix}
     \ddot{\bar{q}} \\
     \bar{\lambda}
   \end{bmatrix} +
   \begin{bmatrix}
     \bar{g}_d \\
     \bar{g}_{hnd}
   \end{bmatrix}
   =
   \begin{bmatrix}
     0 \\
     0
   \end{bmatrix}

where :math:`\bar{g}_d` is the dynamic bias, and the last term on the right
hand side, called the constraint bias, can be quickly computed as:

.. jupyter-execute::

   ghnd = diff_constraint.xreplace({qddr : 0 for qddr in qdd})
   sm.trigsimp(ghnd)

We call the block matrix called the extended mass matrix and the vector on the
right hand side the extended dynamic bias.

With these `N + m + M` equations, it is possible to solve for
:math:`\ddot{\bar{q}}` and :math:`\lambda`. It is therefore possible to
integrate/simulate the system directly. However, because only the second
derivative of the constraint is satisfied, numerical errors can build up due to
not satisfying the actual constraint the constraint is not satisfied. It is
better to use a differential algebraic solver, as discussed in :ref:`Equations
of Motion with Holonomic Constraints`. See `the scikits.ode documentation`_ for
a worked example.

.. _`the scikits.ode documentation`: https://github.com/bmcage/odes/blob/master/ipython_examples/Planar%20Pendulum%20as%20DAE.ipynb

The method of the Lagrange multipliers can of course also be used within Kane's
method. However, it increases the number of equations, which is why the
elimination approach is often preferred there. An exception being scenarios
where the constraint force itself is a useful output, for instance to check
no-slip conditions in case of limited friction.

Lagrange's vs Kane's
====================

The is book has now presented two alternatives to the Newton-Euler method:
Kane's method and Lagrange's method.  This raises the questions: when should
each alternative method be used?

For constrained systems, Kane's method has the advantage that the equations of
motion are given for a set of independent generalized speeds only. In other
words, Kane's method gives a minimal set of equations. This can give rise to
simplified equations, additional insight, and numerically more efficient
simulation. This also gives the benefit that Lagrange multipliers are not
needed when solving constrained systems with Kane's method.

Furthermore, the connection from Kane's method to vector mechanics, that is,
Newton's Laws, is clearer, which can provide additional insight, and make it
easier to incorporate non-conservative forces such as friction.

On the other hand, the Lagrange method only requires energies as input, for
which only the velocities of the bodies are needed. Therefore, it can be
simpler to derive than the accelerations which are needed for Kane's method.

Furthermore, the Lagrange method results in a set of equations with well
understood structures and properties.  These structures and properties are not
studied further in these materials. A starting point for further study is
`Noether's theorem`_, which extends the idea of ignorable coordinates to find
conserved quantities like momentum and energy.

.. _`Noether's theorem`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noether%27s_theorem_

.. (Learn more) Generalized momentum
.. =================================

.. The partial derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to generalized speed is
.. called the generalized momentum.

.. .. math::

..     p = \frac{\partial L}{\partial \dot{\bar{q}}}

.. Some ideas behind generalized momentum will be discussed with the following example,
.. which is a simplified version of the falling cat example:
.. * body A is a cylinder that can rotate wrt ground around same axis as gravity: :math:`\hat{n}_z``
.. * body B is a cylinder that can rotate wrt body A around same axis as gravity
.. * body C is a cylinder that can rotate wrt body C around a (body fixed) axis perpendicular to gravity :math:`\hat{b}_x`
.. * There are two actuators providing a torque on the joints between bodies A and B and bodies B and C respectively.

.. This example will also show how to apply motor torques at joints.

.. .. jupyter-execute::

..    t, l, r, T_b, T_c = sm.symbols('t, l, r, T_b, T_c')
..    q1, q2, q3 = me.dynamicsymbols('q1, q2, q3')

..    N = me.ReferenceFrame('N')
..    A = me.ReferenceFrame('A')
..    B = me.ReferenceFrame('B')
..    C = me.ReferenceFrame('C')

..    A.orient_axis(N, q1, N.z)
..    B.orient_axis(A, q2, A.z)
..    C.orient_axis(B, q3, B.x)

..    g = 1
..    rho = 1
..    m = rho*l*sm.pi*r**2
..    I_xx_or_yy = m/12*(3*r**2 + l**2)
..    I_zz= m/2*r**2
..    I_A_Ao = me.inertia(A, I_xx_or_yy , I_xx_or_yy, I_zz)
..    I_B_Bo = me.inertia(B, I_xx_or_yy , I_xx_or_yy, I_zz)
..    I_C_Co = me.inertia(C, I_xx_or_yy , I_xx_or_yy, I_zz)

..    O = me.Point('O')
..    O.set_vel(N, 0.0)
..    Ao = me.Point("A_c")
..    Ao.set_pos(O, -0.5*l*A.z)
..    Bo = me.Point("B_c")
..    Bo.set_pos(Ao, -0.5*l*A.z - 0.5*l*B.z)
..    Co = me.Point("C_c")
..    Co.set_pos(Bo, -0.5*l*B.z -0.5*l*C.z)

.. The next step is again to form the Lagrangian and find the equations of motion. As the system has no further constraints,
.. the Lagrange multiplier method is not needed. The actuator torques are added to the right hand side of the equation, in
.. the same way as active forces are added to Kane's equations. Here the torques are represented by the variables :math:`T_b`
.. and :math:`T_c` are used to represent.

.. .. jupyter-execute::

..     T = m/2*(squarednorm(Ao.vel(N)) + squarednorm(Bo.vel(N)) + squarednorm(Co.vel(N))) + 1/2*(
..             quadraticform(I_A_Ao, A.ang_vel_in(N)) + quadraticform(I_B_Bo, B.ang_vel_in(N)) + quadraticform(I_C_Co, C.ang_vel_in(N)))
..     V = m*g*N.z.dot(Co.pos_from(O))
..     L = sm.Matrix([T - V])

..     q = sm.Matrix([q1, q2, q3])
..     qd = q.diff(t)
..     qdd = qd.diff(t)

..     p = L.jacobian(qd)
..     p.simplify()
..     left_hand_side = (p.diff(t) - L.jacobian(q)).transpose()

..     qdd_zerod = {qddr: 0 for qddr in qdd}
..     Md = left_hand_side.jacobian(qdd)
..     gd = left_hand_side.xreplace(qdd_zerod)

..     F_r = sm.Matrix([0.0, T_b, T_c])
..     qdd_sol = Md.solve(F_r - gd)


.. .. Practice problem: add a damping force or a coulomb friction force in the first joint
.. .. (the example and this problem are inspired by a talk by A. Ruina, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j-wHI764dWU)


.. The generalized momenta are an invertable function of the generalized speeds. The Euler-Lagrange
.. equation can therefore be rewritten in the form:

.. .. math::

..     \dot{p_r} = \frac{\partial L}{\partial q_r} + \bar{F}_r

.. .. math::

..     \dot{q_r} = \dot{q_r}(\bar{p})

.. which forms a `Hamiltonian System`_. Hamiltonian systems and their
.. extension Port-Hamiltonian systems are often used in physics and control theory respectively.

.. .. _`Hamiltonian System`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hamiltonian_system

.. For the system described above, the following code derives these equations:

.. .. jupyter-execute::

..    p1, p2, p3 = me.dynamicsymbols('p1, p2, p3')
..    p_sym = sm.Matrix([p1, p2, p3])
..    qd_repl = sm.solve(p_sym - p.transpose(), qd)
..    pd = F_r - L.jacobian(q).transpose()
..    qd_solve = qd.xreplace(qd_repl)

.. There are two important realizations:

.. .. jupyter-execute::

..    pd

.. The time derivative of the first generalized momentum is zero. That means the generalized momentum
.. is conserved. This is always the case when the Lagrangian does not depend on a given generalized coordinate, and there
.. are no non-conservative active forces acting on that coordinate either. This statement is a particular case of
.. `Noether's theorem`_.

.. .. _`Noether's theorem`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Noether%27s_theorem_

.. .. jupyter-execute::

..    p.transpose().jacobian(qd) - Md

.. The Jacobian of the generalized momenta with respect to the generalized velocities is the mass matrix. This is always
.. true, because the kinetic energy can be written as :math:`\frac{1}{2}\dot{\bar{q}}^\text{T}\mathbf{M}_d\dot{\bar{q}}`.
.. As a result

.. .. math::

..     \bar{p} = \mathbf{M}_d(q)\dot{\bar{q}},

.. which explains the name generalized momentum, as this matches the definitions of momentum and angular momentum in the case
.. of pointmasses.


.. (Learn more) Euler-Lagrange in optimization
.. ===========================================

.. The Euler-Lagrange equation also appears in a different setting: optimization. When optimizing
.. a function :math:`f` over its arguments :math:`q`, we have the well known necessary condition for an optimum:

.. .. math::

..     \frac{\partial f}{\partial q} = 0

.. It is also possible to consider optimizing not over variables, but over functions of one variable. This problem
.. is considered in the mathematical field `Calculus of Variations`_
.. To do so, there must then be a function-like thing that turns possible function into a value which we want to
.. optimize. Such a function-like thing is called a functional, and is often given as an integral. The
.. optimization problem then takes the following form:

.. .. _`Calculus of Variations`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calculus_of_variations

.. .. math::

..     \min_{q(t)} \int_{0}^{T} L(t, q, \dot{q})\text{d}t \quad \text{subject to} \quad q(0) = 0, q(T) = q_T

.. Examples of such optimizations are:

.. * The shortest path problem, where :math:`L = |\dot{q}|`
.. * The brachistochrone problem, that tries to find the shape of a slope, such that a ball rolling off it
..   reaches the bottom in minimal time
.. * Various optimal control problem, in which the integral over the torque squared plus the position error squared
..   should be minimized.

.. For the functional optimization problem, there is again a necessary condition:

.. .. math::

..     \frac{\text{d}}{\text{d}t}\frac{\partial L}{\partial \dot{q}} - \frac{\partial L}{\partial q}= 0,

.. which we recognize as the Euler-Lagrange equations.

.. This means that the laws of nature governing rigid body motions result in motions that minimize the integral of the
.. Lagrangian.  This is called Hamilton's principle. It turns out that
.. `many physical laws_` take such a form of minimizing
.. the value of a function. One example is Fermat's principle, which states that light takes the path of minimum time.

.. .. _`many physical laws`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variational_principle

.. The optimization point-of-view of the Lagrange method also gives an interpretation for the Lagrange multipliers. They
.. are the same as the Lagrange multipliers used in optimization.
